Add documentation to document event sync subscriber (#36503)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang: docs/language-server/DocumentEventSyncPublisherSubscriberDesign.md

# Document event sync publisher subscriber

## Overview

This document contains information about the implementation of a notification system inside the language server using the 
PubSub architecture. Goal is to allow communication between language server and extensions synchronously.

Following diagram shows how this has been implemented. 

![alt text](../images/language-server/001-DocumentEventPubSub-class-diagram.png)

> - Event Subscribers and Event Publishers get loaded using JavaSPI and get subscribed to publishers when a document 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Event Subscribers and Event Publishers get loaded using JavaSPI and subscribed to an EventKind. A subscriber is notified when a publisher publishes an event (document update, open, close, etc) under that EventKind 
```

Author: For now, we are not publishing events on `didClose` and we do not have to publish events on `didClose` right? @IMS94

Author: Can you be more specific on the `image` folder move? currently the image is in the `docs/images/language-server/001-DocumentEventPubSub-class-diagram.png` path

Reviewer: Let's add LS related images in `docs/language-server/images` folder. We have to create that.

Author: what about the `didClose` @IMS94

Reviewer: Though we don't support `didClose` as an event, it's a possible extension in the future. Just wanted the reader to get the idea of event kinds and subscribing.

opens or changes.

> - Event Publishers and Subscribers have an Event kind and a subscriber can only subscribe to a single publisher at once.

Reviewer 2: EventKind related info is not clear for me.

> - Event Publishers and Subscribers have an Event kind and a subscriber can only subscribe to a single publisher at once.

Reviewer: We can say `EventKind acts as the topic. A subscriber can be notified on only 1 EventKind`.
A subscriber is subscribing to the event kind, not to the publisher

> If we need a subscriber to subscribe for two publishers, then we have to create two different subscribers and subscribe

Reviewer 2: Don't show the link between publisher and subscriber. Publisher should link to Event Kind. Also, Subscriber should link to Event Kind.

Reviewer 2: For example, 

If we need to consume events from multiple EventKinds, then we have to create two different subscribers and subscribe to those EventKinds individually.

separately.
- When an Event Publisher publishes, the `onEvent()` method is getting triggered for each subscriber that has been

> subscribed to the publisher.

Reviewer 2: Ideal to have, something like,

- When an Event Publisher publishes events to an EventKind, the `onEvent()` method is getting triggered for each subscriber that has been subscribed to the specific EventKind

- We can override `publish()` and `onEvent()` methods to control the event synchronization.
  

## How to Use

> - **Event Publisher** is an internal interface and cannot be accessed publicly by extension developers. The server 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Event Publisher** is an internal interface which is not exported from the module. The server 
```

decides which events to be delegated to a particular publisher. In the `publish()` method a debouncing mechanism has 

> implemented for the **Project Update Event Publisher**.

Reviewer: Classes we should use `ClassName` formatting. Not bold font. Same for the `EventPublisher` and `EventSubscriber` interfaces.

- **Event Subscriber** is an interface which can be accessed publicly by extension developers and get notified when 
subscribed to a publisher.
- If the extension uses different file schemes, users have to handle that from extension itself.
  (ex: expression file scheme)

## Example

### 1. Implementing a Subscriber

We can implement `EventSubscriber` interface as follows.

```java
@JavaSPIService("org.ballerinalang.langserver.commons.eventsync.spi.EventSubscriber")
public class CommandRegisterSubscriber implements EventSubscriber {
    public static final String NAME = "Command register subscriber";

    @Override
    public EventKind eventKind() {
        return EventKind.PROJECT_UPDATE;
    }
    
    @Override
    public void onEvent(ExtendedLanguageClient client, DocumentServiceContext context,
                        LanguageServerContext languageServerContext) {

>         checkAndRegisterCommands(context);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // Your implementation here
```
No need to copy the same logic here. Just put a link to an implementation class (like CommandRegisteringSubscriber`.

Reviewer: Also mention that the `DocumentServiceContext` and the `fileUri` can be used to determine `scheme` specific events. Currently LS supports `file` and `expr` schemes.

    }

    @Override
    public String getName() {
        return NAME;
    }
    

>     public static synchronized void checkAndRegisterCommands(DocumentServiceContext context) {

Reviewer: Remove this method

            clientLogger.logTrace("Not registering commands: client doesn't support dynamic commands registration");
            return;
        }
        context.workspace().waitAndGetPackageCompilation(context.filePath())
                .ifPresent(pkgCompilation 
                        -> compileAndRegisterCommands(serverContext, clientLogger, serverCapabilities, pkgCompilation));
    }
}
```
### 2. Implementing a Publisher

`EventPublishers` can be implemented extending `AbstractEventPublisher`.

```java
@JavaSPIService("org.ballerinalang.langserver.eventsync.EventPublisher")
public class ProjectUpdateEventPublisher extends AbstractEventPublisher {
    public static final String NAME = "Project update event publisher";
    private CompletableFuture<Boolean> latestScheduled = null;
    private static final long DIAGNOSTIC_DELAY = 1;
    
    @Override
    public EventKind getKind() {
        return EventKind.PROJECT_UPDATE;
    }

    @Override
    public String getName() {
        return NAME;
    }

    @Override
    public void publish(ExtendedLanguageClient client, LanguageServerContext serverContext,
                        DocumentServiceContext context) {

>         if (latestScheduled != null && !latestScheduled.isDone()) {

Reviewer: No need to have an implementation here. Just say `// your implementation here` and below this provide a link to an existing implementation.

implemented for the `ProjectUpdateEventPublisher`.
- `EventSubscriber` is an interface which can be accessed publicly by extension developers and get notified when 
subscribed to a publisher.
- If the extension uses different file schemes, users have to handle that from extension itself.
- `DocumentServiceContext` and the `fileUri` can be used to determine scheme specific events. Currently, LS supports 
file and expr schemes.

## Example

### 1. Implementing a Subscriber

We can implement `EventSubscriber` interface as follows.

```java
@JavaSPIService("org.ballerinalang.langserver.commons.eventsync.spi.EventSubscriber")
public class CommandRegisterSubscriber implements EventSubscriber {
    
    public static final String NAME = "Command register subscriber";

    @Override
    public EventKind eventKind() {
        return EventKind.PROJECT_UPDATE;
    }
    
    @Override
    public void onEvent(ExtendedLanguageClient client, DocumentServiceContext context,
                        LanguageServerContext languageServerContext) {
        // Your implementation here
    }

    @Override
    public String getName() {
        return NAME;
    }
}
```

> [`CommandRegisterSubscriber`](../../language-server/modules/langserver-core/src/main/java/org/ballerinalang/langserver/eventsync/subscribers/CommandRegisterSubscriber.java)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [`CommandRegisterSubscriber`](../../language-server/modules/langserver-core/src/main/java/org/ballerinalang/langserver/eventsync/subscribers/CommandRegisterSubscriber.java) for an example
```
